cdrug
=====

Inconsistency in large pharmacogenomic studies

Cancer cell line studies have long been used to test efficacy of therapeutic agents and to explore genomic factors predictive of response. Two large-scale pharmacogenomic studies were published recently (CGP and CCLE); each assayed a panel of several hundred cancer cell lines for gene expression, copy number, genome sequence, and pharmacological response to multiple anti-cancer drugs. The resulting datasets present a unique opportunity to characterize mechanisms associated with drug response, with 471 cell lines and 15 drugs assayed in both. However, while gene expression is well correlated between studies, the measured pharmacologic drugs response is highly discordant. This poor correspondence is surprising as both studies assessed drug response using common estimators: the IC50 (concentration at which the drug inhibited 50% of the maximal cellular growth), and the AUC (area under the activity curve measuring dose response). For drugs screened in both studies, only one had a Spearman correlation coefficient in measured response greater than 0.6. Importantly these results are also reflected in inconsistent associations between genomic features and drug response. Although the source of inconsistencies in drug response measures between these two well-controlled studies remains uncertain, it makes drawing firm conclusions about response very difficult and has potential implications for using these outcome measures to assess gene-drug relationships or select potential anti-cancer drugs based on their reported results. Our findings suggest standardization of response measurement protocols in pharmacogenomic studies is essential before such studies can live up to their promise.